The collection of scripts in this repository predicts the structures of protein-multimers using lists of fasta files in a directory using [Slurm](https://slurm.schedmd.com/documentation.html).

## Installation
Install miniconda: 
```
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh && bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
``` 

Clone this repository: 

```
git clone git@github.com:Svensson-Lab/run-hpc-alphafold.git 
cd run-hpc-alphafold
```
Install requirements and create conda environment 

```
conda create --name alphafold python==3.8
conda update -n base conda

conda install -y -c conda-forge openmm==7.5.1 cudatoolkit==11.2.2 pdbfixer
conda install -y -c bioconda hmmer hhsuite==3.3.0 kalign2
conda install -y -c conda-forge openmm==7.5.1 cudatoolkit==11.2.2 pdbfixer
```

- Change jax/jaxlib versions based on your alphafold version(below is for 2.2.4)
``` 
pip install absl-py==1.0.0 biopython==1.79 chex==0.0.7 dm-haiku==0.0.9 dm-tree==0.1.6 immutabledict==2.0.0 jax==0.3.25 ml-collections==0.1.0 numpy==1.21.6 pandas==1.3.4 protobuf==3.20.1 scipy==1.7.0 tensorflow-cpu==2.9.0

pip install --upgrade --no-cache-dir jax==0.3.17 jaxlib==0.3.14+cuda11.cudnn805 -f https://storage.googleapis.com/jax-releases/jax_cuda_releases.html
```

Activate environment:
```
conda activate alphafold
```

Set permissions for shell files: 
```
chmod +x compute_msa.sh
chmod +x compute_msa_parallel.sh
chmod +x predict_structures.sh 
chmod +x predict_from_precomputed.sh
```

## Usage
Do not move the scripts above from the run-hpc-alphafold folder, this will cause errors in accessing paths.

### Inputs
The inputs should be in a directory with two folders: "Ligands" and "Receptors", each containing .fasta files for the required sequences. Then, the script will create another directory "fasta_sequences" which holds the merged sequences, these are the sequences we will be getting predictions for. You only need to provide a folder "Ligands" which contains a list of ligand fasta files and "Receptors" which contains the fasta files for your receptors. Like so: 
 
```
path/to/inputs/directory/                           
    Receptors/                                   
        # fasta files for receptors
    Ligands/                       
	# fasta files for ligands        
```

To provide your paths to each script please edit the necessary parts of either the `predict_structures` or the `compute_msa_parallel` files. For both MSA computations and structure predictions, we use the inputs: 

```
fasta_path=path/to/inputs/directory/ #path to receptor fasta files 
run_parafold_path="run_parafold_no_template.sh" #path to run_parafold_no_template.sh script

out_dir="/home/groups/katrinjs/predictions" #directory to write to
data_dir="$OAK/alphafold_data" #directory to alphafold database folder, (make sure not to have "/" at the end)  
installation_dir="/home/groups/katrinjs/alphafold"
logdir=$out_dir #directory to write logs to, same as outdir by default
```
1. `fasta_path` is the directory of fasta files that will be processed (inputs from the section above)
1. `run_parafold_path` is the script to run alphafold, unless you have a specific modification there is no need to change this. Leaving `run_alphafold_test` and `run_parafold_no_template` is fine.
1. `out_dir` is the directory to write MSAs and predictions to.
1. `data_dir` is the directory to alphafold database folder, (make sure not to have a "/" at the end)
1. `installation_dir` is the directory of the alphafold installation, such as the folder cloned from deepmind's alphafold repository or the ParallelFold folder. This is the folder that should contain the run_alphafold.py file and the alphafold utilities.  
1. `logdir` is directory to write logs to, same as outdir by default

### Running Alphafold
#### Compute MSAs
After editing the inputs in `compute_msa_parallel.sh`, run it like so:
```
bash compute_msa_parallel.sh
```
This will compute MSAs for each ligand and receptor, saving them to ligands_msas and receptors_msas folders inside the output directory. If you already have MSAs for your ligands or receptors, there is option to stop the script from needlessly computing MSAs by setting `do_ligands` or do_receptors to false. You can download MSAs for the library described in [the paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.03.16.531341v1) from the link [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1CzcO4JfKO8NrnVQvIKIQTCn__ha1ZWly/view?usp=share_link). To use the precomputed MSAs, you can place your MSAs in receptors_msas or ligands_msas folder inside your output folder(these two folders are generated by the `compute_msa_parallel` script).

#### Copy MSAs
Calling 
```
python handle_msas.py out_dir input_dir
``` 
Will move the required MSAs for each sequence to the corresponding folder in the output directory. For multimer BMP10_ACE.fasta for example, alphafold needs the MSA for BMP10 and ACE sequences, instead of computing them again every time,we can copy the MSAs we have precomputed in the "Compute MSAs" step. 

#### Predict structures
After changing the inputs in the `predict_structures.sh` script, calling:
```
bash predict_structures.sh
```
Will read MSAs from the output folder and save predictions for each sequence to their corresponding folders inside the output folder.

### Tips and Possible Issues
1. If the number of sequences you are processing is high, there is a possibly that your HPC environment will not allow you to submit the whole library. To solve this you can modify the `num_files` and `i` variables in the bash scripts to run fewer simultaneous predictions. For example `i=0` and `num_files=800` will process the first 800 sequences and i=800 and num_files=1600 will process the next 800.
1. Make sure that the jax version is compatible with the version of Alphafold you are using, i.e. use "jax:0.3.25 + jaxlib:0.3.25" with Alphafold 2.3.x and "jax:0.3.17 + jaxlib:0.3.14" with Alphafold 2.2.4
